README.md, before:

# First Proof — AI-Generated Mathematical Proofs

Solutions to the [1st Proof](https://1stproof.org/) challenge: ten research-level mathematics problems solved autonomously by AI (Claude Sonnet 4), with Lean 4 formal verification.

**Challenge paper:** [arXiv:2602.05192](https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05192)

## Results

| # | Problem | Field | Answer | Paper |
|---|---------|-------|--------|-------|
| P01 | Φ⁴₃ measure equivalence | Stochastic PDE | **NO** — mutually singular | [PDF](04_papers/P01_paper.pdf) |
| P02 | Rankin–Selberg test vector | Representation theory | **YES** — universal W exists | [PDF](04_papers/P02_paper.pdf) |
| P03 | Markov chain / Macdonald | Combinatorics | **YES** — chain exists | [PDF](04_papers/P03_paper.pdf) |
| P04 | Finite free Stam inequality | Free probability | **YES** for n≤3; **OPEN** n≥4 | [PDF](04_papers/P04_paper.pdf) |
| P05 | Equivariant slice filtration | Algebraic topology | **YES** — geometric fixed points | [PDF](04_papers/P05_paper.pdf) |
| P06 | ε-light subsets | Spectral graph theory | **Partial** — c=1/3 conditional | [PDF](04_papers/P06_paper.pdf) |
| P07 | Lattice acyclicity | Lie groups | **NO** for δ=0 or d≤4 | [PDF](04_papers/P07_paper.pdf) |
| P08 | Lagrangian smoothing | Symplectic geometry | **YES** — smoothing exists | [PDF](04_papers/P08_paper.pdf) |
| P09 | Quadrilinear tensors | Multilinear algebra | **YES** — degree ≤ 4 | [PDF](04_papers/P09_paper.pdf) |
| P10 | Preconditioned CG for CP | Numerical linear algebra | **YES** — cost bound proved | [PDF](04_papers/P10_paper.pdf) |

## Lean 4 Formalization

1,932 lines of Lean 4 across 10 files, verified with Mathlib v4.27.0.

- **119 custom axioms** modeling objects not yet in Mathlib
- **1 sorry** (P04 n≥4 — mathematically open, not a formalization gap)
- **9/10 main theorems fully proved** from axioms

See the [Lean formalization paper](05_lean_formalization/lean_formalization.pdf) for details.

### Build

```bash
# Requires Lean 4 + elan
lake build
```

## Repository Structure

```
01_problems/                    Problem statements
  01_stochastic_phi4/             problem.md
  02_rankin_selberg/              ...
  ...

02_proofs/                      Proofs and AI interaction transcripts
  01_stochastic_phi4/             proof.md, transcript.md
  ...

03_lean/                        Lean 4 source files
  FirstProof.lean                 Root import
  FirstProof/
    P01_StochasticPhi4.lean       ...
    P10_PreconditionedCG.lean

04_papers/                      Submission papers (.tex + .pdf)
  P01_paper.tex, P01_paper.pdf
  ...

05_lean_formalization/          Meta-paper on the Lean formalization
  lean_formalization.tex
  lean_formalization.pdf

shared/                         Common notation and references
lakefile.toml                   Lean build configuration
```

## Method

All proofs and all Lean code were generated by **Claude Sonnet 4** (Anthropic). The human operator directed strategy, reviewed axiom correctness, and prompted expansions. No mathematical content and no Lean code was written by the human operator. Full AI interaction transcripts are in `02_proofs/*/transcript.md`.

## License

All rights reserved. Contact the author for permissions.

Commit message:

Fix AI model names: Claude Opus 4.6, Gemini 3, ChatGPT 5.2 Pro, Perplexity, Grok
Updated README.md and lean_formalization.tex/pdf to reflect the actual
AI systems used throughout the project.

README.md, after:

# First Proof — AI-Generated Mathematical Proofs

Solutions to the [1st Proof](https://1stproof.org/) challenge: ten research-level mathematics problems solved autonomously by AI, with Lean 4 formal verification.

**Challenge paper:** [arXiv:2602.05192](https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05192)

## Results

| # | Problem | Field | Answer | Paper |
|---|---------|-------|--------|-------|
| P01 | Φ⁴₃ measure equivalence | Stochastic PDE | **NO** — mutually singular | [PDF](04_papers/P01_paper.pdf) |
| P02 | Rankin–Selberg test vector | Representation theory | **YES** — universal W exists | [PDF](04_papers/P02_paper.pdf) |
| P03 | Markov chain / Macdonald | Combinatorics | **YES** — chain exists | [PDF](04_papers/P03_paper.pdf) |
| P04 | Finite free Stam inequality | Free probability | **YES** for n≤3; **OPEN** n≥4 | [PDF](04_papers/P04_paper.pdf) |
| P05 | Equivariant slice filtration | Algebraic topology | **YES** — geometric fixed points | [PDF](04_papers/P05_paper.pdf) |
| P06 | ε-light subsets | Spectral graph theory | **Partial** — c=1/3 conditional | [PDF](04_papers/P06_paper.pdf) |
| P07 | Lattice acyclicity | Lie groups | **NO** for δ=0 or d≤4 | [PDF](04_papers/P07_paper.pdf) |
| P08 | Lagrangian smoothing | Symplectic geometry | **YES** — smoothing exists | [PDF](04_papers/P08_paper.pdf) |
| P09 | Quadrilinear tensors | Multilinear algebra | **YES** — degree ≤ 4 | [PDF](04_papers/P09_paper.pdf) |
| P10 | Preconditioned CG for CP | Numerical linear algebra | **YES** — cost bound proved | [PDF](04_papers/P10_paper.pdf) |

## Lean 4 Formalization

1,932 lines of Lean 4 across 10 files, verified with Mathlib v4.27.0.

- **119 custom axioms** modeling objects not yet in Mathlib
- **1 sorry** (P04 n≥4 — mathematically open, not a formalization gap)
- **9/10 main theorems fully proved** from axioms

See the [Lean formalization paper](05_lean_formalization/lean_formalization.pdf) for details.

### Build

```bash
# Requires Lean 4 + elan
lake build
```

## Repository Structure

```
01_problems/                    Problem statements
  01_stochastic_phi4/             problem.md
  02_rankin_selberg/              ...
  ...

02_proofs/                      Proofs and AI interaction transcripts
  01_stochastic_phi4/             proof.md, transcript.md
  ...

03_lean/                        Lean 4 source files
  FirstProof.lean                 Root import
  FirstProof/
    P01_StochasticPhi4.lean       ...
    P10_PreconditionedCG.lean

04_papers/                      Submission papers (.tex + .pdf)
  P01_paper.tex, P01_paper.pdf
  ...

05_lean_formalization/          Meta-paper on the Lean formalization
  lean_formalization.tex
  lean_formalization.pdf

shared/                         Common notation and references
lakefile.toml                   Lean build configuration
```

## Method

All proofs and all Lean code were generated by AI: **Claude Opus 4.6** (Anthropic), **Gemini 3** (Google), **ChatGPT 5.2 Pro** (OpenAI), **Perplexity**, and **Grok** (xAI). The human operator directed strategy, reviewed axiom correctness, and prompted expansions. No mathematical content and no Lean code was written by the human operator. Full AI interaction transcripts are in `02_proofs/*/transcript.md`.

## License

All rights reserved. Contact the author for permissions.
